authentication and authorization flow:
Both of them are based on stateless http communication.

1. Session-based:

User submits credentials via login form to server. 
Server stores user credentials, and then also session id and session data(user ID, permissions, expiration, specific profile data) directly or in a dedicated database. 
Server verifies credentials against stored values. 
Server generates a random Session ID and sends it back to client(in form of a cookie, usually JSESSIONID), and saves it on server side, so it knows which user is associated to it:
	Server stores: 		session_id → { user_id, roles, expiration, ... }
Because the session details are saved on server in form of the session id, this authentication is called stateful.
Client stores the session ID in the browser cookie dedicated to this server, and with each submitted request to that server, it sends all its cookies along with the request, to authenticate itself to server.
Server compares session ID against stored data to retrieve associated user details. 
Cookies are usually stored until the browser on which they are generated is closed(session cookies) or based on their expiration date(other type cookies have Expires or Max-Age attribute).

2.Token-based:
    1.User login within client -  client redirects to auhtorization's server Login UI. User logs in on the auth.server's login page. 
Authorization server(Auth0, Azure AD, etc.) redirects to client with an authorization code. 

Client uses client secret (confidential client) or PKCE(public client) to exchange this authorization code for an access token:
The credentials are submitted to the AUTHORIZATION server for verification (these are client credentials, not user credentials):
	Confidential clients send:
		authorization code, client ID, client secret  
	Public clients (PKCE) send:
		authorization code, client ID, code_verifier, NO client secret

	Based on the OAuth classification
	    SPAs and native apps are:
		Public clients (OAuth classification - cannot keep client secret safely)
		Frontend-only applications (architecture classification)
		Clients that must embed logic normally done by a backend (practical reality)
		Are NOT classified as backend(although they embed backend logic), because
		
	    Backend 
		in OAuth, Confidential Client = can keep client secret
	    Web Apps, BFFs(see below) - also Confidential Clients
	
	
    2. Which type application can store a client secret securely?  (Client secret = application-level secret used for identifying the application to the authorization server - one per application, irrelevant which user)
 
	2.A Public clients:  No secure secret storage - Apps where client and user coexist on one source(e.g. SPAs, native(local backend) or mobile apps: 
		   - SPA contain both as frontend and backend logic (but they do not act as backend by OAuth definition of "Backend Client" which is a backend server, confidential client, whereas SPA is frontend-only, public client); 
		   - native app/mobile app contains backend logic itself, but a user has installed it locally (so it is not a "Confidential Client" type backend server, but a public client) 
	    No separation of cient/user is a security concern, as the client secret exists once per app (= same for all app users, for access codes verification) could be extracted from the installed app data.

	    PKCE procedure used: PKCE details + authorization code sent in multiple steps

	        When user logs in and client redirects to auth server for auth login, it has already generated PKCE codes. It sends the code_challenge along 
	        Instead of client secret, app has generated:
			code_verifier (randomly generated string, the app will keep it until sent to auth server):
				- Unique per authorization request
				- based on the verifier code challenge can be generated by the app
				- only code verifier is stored by the app
				- app stores code verifier only for duration of PKCE process
			code_challenge (SHA‑256 hash of the code verifier, Base64URL‑encoded; the app will send to auth server)

 	   	 I. While user login redirect, client includes code CHALLENGE in the /authorize request 
	  	 II. Authorization code from auth server obtained(sometimes trough redirects (OAuth 2 authorization code flow))
	   	 III. Authorization code + code VERIFIER submitted to auth server in in the /token request 
	     	      After this step, app can delete the stored code_verifier as it is a per-auth-request generated value (and not needed in any subsequent steps).
	   	 IV. Authorization server uses SHA256 + Base64 encoding and compares the transformed VERIFIER against the original CHALLENGE. 
	    	 V. Verification success - auth server submits access token + refresh token to client (mobile apps)  or access token only (SPAs cannot store any token securely, thus refresh tokens, capable of generating unlimited access tokens, are in risk of XSS attack if provided to a SPA. Major auth servers disable/don't include/discourage refresh tokens for SPAs by default)
	   	 VI. Client stores access token(short lived, usually 1hr) + refresh token
	             Tokens are delivered:
	             - in response body (JSON) - mobile apps, Single Page Applications(SPAs) (or URL fragment in old implicit flow)
	           Public clients cannot receive tokens in Http-only cookies (SPAs which do not communicate with other servers based on access tokens), because setting Set-Cookie header as HttpOnly for outgoing request to authorization server is possible only by a backend server. Thus authorization server will never include cookies in responses as http only by itself. Although SPAs would automatically resubmit every cookie they store to same site requests (sometimes also cross site origin, depending on SameSite settings), still it is the backend server the has to set the HttpOnly cookies for them in the first place - which, for pure SPAs, is not architecturally feasible.

	2.B Confidential clients - Secure storage of client secret - Apps where user exists separately from client: web apps, BFFs, (legacy implicit flow, legacy password flow)
  	    
	  Procedure used: Authorization code + client secret + client ID sent to auth server.
	  After user login, the client redirects to auth server for authorization request. Already a
	  Upon verification success, server issues directly an access token(short lived, usually 1hr) and a refresh token. 
	    Optionally ID token(using OpenID Connect). 
	   Tokens are delivered:
	   - in Http-only cookies (web apps, BFFs(see below))
	   - implicit flow: access token delivered in URL fragment (old SPAs)
	   - password flow: user and client directly exchange user credentials and access token (deprecated - legacy backend apps, intranet, VPN, trusted corporate environments with controlled network and a managed device)
    	
	--------------------------------

	User client stores the access token (and refresh token) and submits it in subsequent requests to the RESOURCE server(= API; backend api owner of resource endpoint):

	- in-memory or secure storage (keystore/keychain) (backend)
	- stored and submitted in HttpOnly cookies (web apps)
	- Stored in secure storage (keystore/keychain) which are hardware-backed and sumbitted in authorization header (mobile apps)
	- Single page applications (SPAs) cannot use hardware-backed options and their option to limit themselves to HttpOnly cookies depends on who they need to communicate with: 
	  Pure browser-built app (SPAs):
		  These are apps which do not rely on a backend server for communication with other APIs(resource servers). And are built purely in the browser by javascript logic.
			- App cannot receive access token in HTTP Only cookie as setting a cookie header as http only requires a backend server, so no requests or responses will contain HTTP only cookies without pre-configuration by a backend
	- Receives access token in response body (or as URL fragment) memory and then manually saves it in memory and resubmits it in Authorization header. This approach poses a vulnerability to XSS attacks.
			  As the location and any eventual encryption/decryption logic is unfortunately readable by Javascript (there is no other option with the browser-only available apps), 
			it makes the tokens retrievable by XSS-attacks which inject custom JavaScript logic.
	- Hybrid apps: Backend-to-Frontend(BFF) apps combine often session's HttpOnly cookies + access token multi-level storage:
			- Primary website rendering and logic happens in the browser layer, but there is a backend BFF layer for security reasons
			- Backend evaluates the validity of the access token.
			- Frontend never sees access token. Frontend receives only session ID/access token in HttpOnly cookies((not visible as not accessible by JavaScript), and submits it to backend in subsequent request.
			Access Token however might be necessary instead of traditional sessions and session IDs, if the backend should communicate with other backend apps, which all expect access token in authorization header.
			These apps combine stateful(if sessionID is used) approach with stateless(access token).



3. Client submits requests to RESOURCE server(=API) using the access token.
Resource server conducts verification of the token, based on a secret(JWT token)(either a shared secret or a public secret, depending on the procedure used: symmetric/asymetric signature generation). 
JWT token is popular in stateless authentication as it contains user-related information, and it does not have to be stored by resource server. 
However there is also a possibility of an opaque token - a random string, not carrying any user-related information. 
It is stateless for the resource servers, because resource servers verify opaque tokens with auth server, for which the tokens are stateful, as it stores related user information and provides it to the resource server, which can provide the related user resources to client without storing the opaque tokens.

4. If the token expires, the client uses the refresh token to generate a new access token: the refresh token is sent to auth. server(Auth0, Azure AD) and directly a new access token is generated


A JWT contains:
F
sub → the user’s unique ID

iss → who issued the token

aud → which API it is meant for

exp → expiration

iat → issued at

scope → permissions

roles/claims → optional identity attributes


{ "sub": "user_12345", "scope": "read:orders write:orders", "exp": 1730000000, "iss": "https://auth.example.com", "aud": "https://api.example.com" }

