CPU contains 
central processing unit (ALU + control unit, registers)
	Registers are CPU's memory storage for interim values, operands, results during instruction execution. When CPU needs to execute instructions, which contains multiple pipeline stages (like sub-instructions, applies actually to any of CPU instruction), it stores related data for the instruction in the register. It is CPU's own fast-access memory (opposed to RAM is farther from CPU + has a different electric design)

		Each CPU instruction is a chain of sub-operations(fetch, decode, execute, memory access, write back) linked together into a pipeline, composing the final instruction. 
		Each sub-operation has its own separate circuit of logical gates constructed together to form a concrete sub-operation. 
		The CPU executes 1 suboperation in one cycle (= one tick of CPU time: each timing pulse tells CPU when to capture values and then clear the CPU's operation circuits for the next cycle: ).
		To reach the cycle pattern, there is:
			- Continuous electrical activity : Based on the clock signal  HIGH -LOW - HIGH - LOW (transistors switching all the time)
			- Clock cycles (timing boundaries that organize the duration of a tick)



RAM is the memory where runtime processes are stored. When stopping running, the ram for the process is released.
CPU stores instructions, variables, variable values, on RAM.
CPU accesses RAM via a System bus, which contains:

 - address bus (memory addresses cpu - ram) where to read/write
 - data bus( carries data between cpu - ram)  what to read/write
 - control bus (carries instructions (read write commands and timing) whether to read/write and when


CPU - address bus - memory controller (converts ram memory sequence number into actual position on RAM x/y axis grid)

64 bit CPU has:
64‑bit wide address bus → can address vastly more memory
64‑bit registers → can process larger values in one step


32 bit CPU 
can represent 4 GB of different addresses (2 ^ 32)  cca. 4 * 10 ^9 bytes

64 bit CPU 

can perform arithmetic on 64 bit numbers in one operation:
  - can handle large integers
  - can handle large pointers (represents 2 ^64 different addresses -> 16 exabites (10 ^18 bytes = 10 ^9 GB)



----------

OS Kernel is the lowest software level responsible for coordinating how software runs of hardware without having software components interfering with each other's performance.
It manages CPU, RAM, hardware components(USB, display, mouse, other)> Kernel decides when to pause a concrete process, allocates/frees RAM for/from processes, how to share CPU cores fairly for processes.
All software (locally installed applications) sits on top of OS kernel.
